#!/usr/bin/perl -w

#   Copyright
#
#      Copyright (C) 2016 Con Kolivas
#
#   License
#
#       This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
#       it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
#       the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
#       (at your option) any later version.
#
#       This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
#       but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
#       MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
#       GNU General Public License for more details.
#
#       You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
#       along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
#
#   Description
#
#	To learn what TOP LEVEL section to use in manual pages,
#	see POSIX/Susv standard and "tility Description Defaults" at
#	http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/xcu_chap01.html#tag_01_11
#
#	This is manual page in Perl POD format. Read more at
#	http://perldoc.perl.org/perlpod.html or run command:
#
#	    perldoc perlpod | less
#
#	To check the syntax:
#
#	    podchecker *.pod
#
#	Create manual page with command:
#
#	    pod2man PAGE.N.pod > PAGE.N

=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

lrz - gzip compatible command line variant of lrzip


=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<lrz> [options] I<file>


=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<lrz> is identical to the B<lrzip> application, however, its command
line options and behaviour are made to be as compatible with B<gzip>
as possible.

=head1 OPTIONS

=head2 General options

=over 9

=item B<--stdout>

=item B<-c>

Output to STDOUT.


=item B<--check>

=item B<-C>

Check integrity of file written on decompression.


=item B<--decompress>

=item B<-d>

Decompress.


=item B<--encrypt>[=I<password>]

=item B<-e>

Password protect sha512/aes128 encryption on compression.


=item B<--help>

=item B<-h>

=item B<-?>

Show help.


=item B<--hash>

=item B<-H>

Display md5 hash integrity information.


=item B<--info>

=item B<-i>

Show compressed file information.


=item B<--license>

=item B<-L>

Display software version and license.


=item B<--progress>

=item B<-P>

Show compression progress.


=item B<--recursive>

=item B<-r>

Operate recursively on directories.


=item B<--test>

=item B<-t>

Test compressed file integrity.


=item B<--verbose>

=item B<-v[vv]>

Increase verbosity.


=item B<--version>

=item B<-V>

Show version.


=back


=head2 Options affecting output

=over 9

=item B<--force>

=item B<-f>

Force overwrite of any existing files.


=item B<--keep>

=item B<-k>

Don't delete source files on de/compression.


=item B<--keep-broken>

=item B<-K>

Keep broken or damaged output files.


=item B<--outfile>  I<name>

=item B<-o> I<name>

Specify the output file name and/or path.


=item B<--outdir> I<dir>

=item B<-O> I<dir>

Specify the output directory when B<-o> is not used.


=item B<--suffix> I<suffix>

=item B<-S> I<suffix>

Specify compressed suffix (default '.lrz').


=back

=head2 Options affecting compression

=over 9

=item B<--bzip2>

=item B<-b>

Bzip2 compression.

=item B<--gzip>

=item B<-g>

Gzip compression using zlib.

=item B<--lzo>

=item B<-l>

Lzo compression (ultra fast).

=item B<--lzma>

Lzma compression (default).

=item B<--no-compress>

=item B<-n>

No backend compression - prepare for other compressor.

=item B<--zpaq>

=item B<-z>

Zpaq compression (best, extreme compression, extremely slow).


=back

=head2 Low level options

=over 9

=item B<-1> .. B<-9>

=item B<--level> I<level>

=item B<-L> I<level>

Set lzma/bzip2/gzip compression level (1-9, default 7).


=item B<--fast>

Alias for B<-1>.


=item B<--best>

Alias for B<-9>.


=item B<--nice-level> I<value>

=item B<-N> I<value>

Set nice value to I<value> (default 0).


=item B<--threads> I<value>

=item B<-P> I<value>

Set processor count to override number of threads.

=item B<--maxram> I<size>

=item B<-m> I<size>

Set maximum available ram as I<size> * 100 MB.
Overrides detected amount of available ram.

=item B<--threshold>

=item B<-T>

Disable LZO compressibility testing.

=item B<--unlimited>

=item B<-U>

Use unlimited window size beyond ramsize (potentially much slower).

=item B<--window> I<size>

=item B<-w> I<size>

Set maximum compression window as I<size> * 100 MB.
Default chosen by heuristic dependent on ram and chosen compression.

=back

See also lrzip(1)

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

lrz uses the same environment and configuration files as lrzip(1)

=head1 FILES

See lrzip(1)

=head1 SEE ALSO

lrzip.conf(5),
lrzip(1),
lrunzip(1),
lrztar(1),
lrzuntar(1),
bzip2(1),
gzip(1),
lzop(1),
rzip(1),
zip(1)

=head1 AUTHORS

This manual page was written by Con Kolivas <kernel@kolivas.org> (but
may be used by others). Released under license GNU GPL version 2 or (at
your option) any later version. For more information about license,
visit <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>.

=cut
