.TH "lrzip.conf" "5" "January 2009, updated May 2019" "" ""
.SH "NAME"
lrzip.conf \- Configuration File for lrzip
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
This file if used, will be read by the lrzip program\&, parsed\&,
and options passed to the program\&. Some options may be overridden
on the command line\&. Others are fixed\&.
.PP
The configuration file must be called \fBlrzip\&.conf\fP\&.
The lrzip program will search for the file automatically in one of
three places\&:
.nf
$PWD \- Current Directory
/etc/lrzip
$HOME/\&.lrzip
.PP
Parameters are set in \fBPARAMETER\&=VALUE\fP fashion where any line
beginning with a \fB#\fP or that is blank will be ignored\&.
Parameter values are not case sensitive except where specified\&.
.PP
.SH "CONFIG FILE EXAMPLE"
.nf
# lrzip.conf example file
# Compression Window size in 100MB. Normally selected by program. (-w)
# \fBWINDOW = 20\fP

# Compression Level 1-9 (7 Default). (-L)
# \fBCOMPRESSIONLEVEL = 7\fP

# Use -U setting, Unlimited ram. Yes or No
# \fBUNLIMITED = NO\fP

# Compression Method, rzip, gzip, bzip2, lzo, or lzma (default), or zpaq. (-n -g -b -l --lzma -z)
# May be overriden by command line compression choice.
# \fBCOMPRESSIONMETHOD = lzma\fP

# LZMA Dictionary Size. 0 = default value used. 12-30 = 2^ds will be used.
# \fBDICTIONARYSIZE = 0\fP

# Perform LZO Test. Default = YES (-T )
# \fBLZOTEST = NO\fP

# Hash Check on decompression, (-c)
# \fBHASHCHECK = YES\fP

# Show HASH value on Compression even if Verbose is off, YES (-H)
# \fBSHOWHASH = YES\fP

# Default output directory (-O)
# \fBOUTPUTDIRECTORY = location\fP

# Verbosity, YES or MAX (v, vv)
# \fBVERBOSITY = max\fP

# Show Progress as file is parsed, YES or no (NO = -q option)
# \fBSHOWPROGRESS = YES\fP

# Set Niceness. 19 is default. -20 to 19 is the allowable range (-N)
# \fBNICE = 19\fP

# Keep broken or damaged output files, YES (-K)
# \fBKEEPBROKEN = YES\fP

# Delete source file after compression (-D)
# this parameter and value are case sensitive
# value must be YES to activate
# \fBDELETEFILES = NO\fP

# Replace existing lrzip file when compressing (-f)
# this parameter and value are case sensitive
# value must be YES to activate
# \fBREPLACEFILE = YES\fP

# Override for Temporary Directory. Only valid when stdin/out or Test is used
# \fBTMPDIR = /tmp\fP

# Whether to use encryption on compression YES, NO (-e)
# \fBENCRYPT = NO\fP
.fi
.PP
.SH "NOTES"
.PP
Be careful when using \fBDELETEFILES\fP or \fBREPLACEFILE\fP as
no warning will be given and lrzip will simply delete the source
or replace the output file!
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lrzip(1)
