#   Copyright
#
#      Copyright (C) 2010-2016,2026 Con Kolivas
#      Copyright (C) 2009-2010 Jari Aalto
#
#   License
#
#       This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
#       it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
#       the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
#       (at your option) any later version.
#
#       This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
#       but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
#       MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
#       GNU General Public License for more details.
#
#       You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
#       along with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
#
#   Description
#
#	To learn what TOP LEVEL section to use in manual pages,
#	see POSIX/Susv standard and "tility Description Defaults" at
#	http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/xcu_chap01.html#tag_01_11
#
#	This is manual page in Perl POD format. Read more at
#	http://perldoc.perl.org/perlpod.html or run command:
#
#	    perldoc perlpod | less
#
#	To check the syntax:
#
#	    podchecker *.pod
#
#	Create manual page with command:
#
#	    pod2man PAGE.N.pod > PAGE.N

=pod

=head1 NAME

lrztar - Directory wrapper for lrzip

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  lrztar [options] DIRECTORY
  lrztar -d [options] DIRECTORY.tar.lrz
  lrzuntar [options] DIRECTORY.tar.lrz

=head1 DESCRIPTION

lrztar is a wrapper for compressing and decompressing whole directories with lrzip(1)
to corresponding file C<DIRECTORY.tar.lrz>. lrzuntar is identical to C<lrztar -d>.
lrztar accepts the same short options as lrzip where they make sense for a
directory tar wrapper.

=head1 OPTIONS

Most options are passed through to lrzip(1). Wrapper-specific behaviour:

=over 4

=item B<-d> I<file>

Decompress lrzip tarball I<file> with lrzcat(1) and tar.

=item B<-t>

Test integrity of a lrzip tarball (calls C<lrzip -t>).

=item B<-i>

Show compressed file information (calls C<lrzip -i>).

=item B<-V>

Show lrztar and lrzip version information.

=item B<-e> I<password>

Encrypt the archive. Because compression is C<tar | lrzip>, the password
is required on the command line; lrzip cannot prompt on the pipe stdin.

=item B<-Q>

Very quiet mode (passed to lrzip).

=item B<-C>, B<-c>

Check integrity of written files on decompression (passed to lrzip).

=item B<-K>, B<-k>

Keep broken or damaged output files (passed to lrzip).

=back

See lrzip(1) for compression backends, levels, window size, and other flags.
=head1 ENVIRONMENT

None.

=head1 FILES

None.

=head1 SEE ALSO

lrzip.conf(5),
lrzuntar(1),
lrzip(1),
lrunzip(1),
lrzcat(1),
lrz(1),
bzip2(1),
gzip(1),
lzop(1),
rzip(1),
zip(1)

=head1 AUTHORS

Program was written by Con Kolivas.

This manual page was written by Jari Aalto <jari.aalto@cante.net> (but
may be used by others). Released under license GNU GPL version 2 or (at
your option) any later version. For more information about license,
visit <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>.

=cut
